CommittingChanges.md: Clarify upload versioning (#92)
canonical/ubuntu-maintainers-handbook: VersionStrings.md

> Version String Format

Author: added

=====================

Selecting the right version can be quite complex as there are many conditions
that need to be considered.

> The following paragraphs first link to the required basics which are shared with Debian.

Author: TIL - it was the former - fixed

Then each paragraph explains each situation that might occur in an upload to Ubuntu.

## The Version field

While Debian docs won't include Ubuntu specificities, it is helpful to fully read through [Debian control field "Version"](https://www.debian.org/doc/debian-policy/ch-controlfields.html#version) for overall topic awareness.

When Ubuntu adds a change or modification on top on what is in Debian, that change is expressed in the version number.

> One can think of a version number consisting of three segements: `[upstream_version]-[debian_revision]ubuntu[ubuntu_revision]`.

Reviewer: "segements" typo

Author: thanks - fixed

The `-` splits the upstream version from the Debian packaging segment as you have seen in [Debian control field "Version"](https://www.debian.org/doc/debian-policy/ch-controlfields.html#version).

> The `ubuntu` string then marks that all following is related to changes added in Ubuntu.

Author: added, thanks!

This distinction allows each party involved in providing a package to the users — Upstream, Debian and Ubuntu — to modify and iterate on their section of the version number without interfering with others.

> By everyone abiding to these patterns we can guarantee package upgradability, but also allow that one can derive a lot of the history by just looking at the package version.

Author: Interesting, added

## Version: Adding a change in the current Ubuntu development release

As shown above `[upstream_version]-[debian_revision]ubuntu[ubuntu_revision]` is the basic pattern.
Therefore, if this is the first Ubuntu change, one would append `ubuntu1` as an Ubuntu suffix.
If there was already an Ubuntu change, one would increment the suffix like `ubuntu1 -> ubuntu2`.

> Example: _Adding a change to `3.3.0-1` in the Ubuntu development release will use `3.3.0-1ubuntu1`_

> Example: _Adding another change to `3.3.0-1ubuntu1` in the Ubuntu development release will use `3.3.0-1ubuntu2`_

Changes in the development release will always add or increment the number that directly follows the `ubuntu` string.
The potentially existing subsequent numbers have special meaning, see _Stable release updates_ below.

| Previous version             | Recommended version   |
| ---------------------------- | --------------------- |
| 2.0-2                        | 2.0-2ubuntu1          |
| 2.0-2ubuntu2                 | 2.0-2ubuntu3          |
| 2.0-2ubuntu2.1               | 2.0-2ubuntu3          |
| 2.0-2build1                  | 2.0-2ubuntu1          |

> 

Reviewer: This table misses an introduction. The last phrase before it mentions another document section entirely.

I would suggest something like "This table shows the common case for version number updates in the development release:" And perhaps not even mention stable releases yet.

Author: You are both right, due to having added much more sections this feels a bit out of context.

I'll move more explanation up into the text, fix the examples to match the table that follows.
I'll remove the mention of SRUs at this stage (I already have the "please read the rest" after the table which is enough.

The only case I need to leave here and say "have a look for details" is in regard to no-change rebuilds.
But for that I added an explanatory statement that now matches the context better.

Note: While being the common case, please consider reading further about more special cases which can lead to different results.

## Version: Merging from Debian

If Ubuntu has delta to the package from Debian, it can not be

> [automatically synced](https://github.com/canonical/ubuntu-maintainers-handbook/blob/main/Syncs.md#why-a-sync-is-better) as thereby that delta would be lost.

Reviewer: Is this URL the correct way to link to another MD document in this tree? Is it because of the anchor `#`? Wouldn't something like [automatically synced](Syncs.md#why-a-sync-is-better) work?

Author: Both work and both styles are used already (e.g. in `Syncs.md`), some even linking to old versions.
I've fixed not just mine but all occurrences so that it works well if checked out and read locally or even on PRs.

> [automatically synced](https://github.com/canonical/ubuntu-maintainers-handbook/blob/main/Syncs.md#why-a-sync-is-better) as thereby that delta would be lost.

Author: fixed

> In that case a Ubuntu developer usually regularly [merges the delta](https://github.com/canonical/ubuntu-maintainers-handbook/blob/main/PackageMerging.md#merging)

Reviewer: "an Ubuntu developer"?

Author: ack, fixed - thanks!

> In that case a Ubuntu developer usually regularly [merges the delta](https://github.com/canonical/ubuntu-maintainers-handbook/blob/main/PackageMerging.md#merging)

Author: Clarified as "usually at least once per Ubuntu release" for magnitude and slightly moved to match the reading flow.

that is in Ubuntu with the content from Debian and indirectly also with the changes by upstream.

The counter for Ubuntu increments resets to 1, therefore the version for the new upload to the Ubuntu development is the version from Debian with a suffix of `ubuntu1`

> Example: _Uploading `3.1` to Ubuntu -Devel based with Ubuntu delta rebased onto Debian `3.1-2`_

|        | Old          | New          |
| ------ | ------------ | ------------ |
| Debian | 2.1-1        | 3.1-2        |
| Devel  | 2.1-1ubuntu2 | 3.1-2ubuntu1 |

## Version: Merging from Upstream

The mentioned special case of an _upstream merge_ is triggered when Ubuntu merges directly from upstream ahead of Debian
upstream. In this case the new version shall:

> * reflect that it was not yet packaged in Debian (at this point in time) and thereby is not _really_ based on a Debian version by using `-0` as the Debian version suffix.

Author: odd ordering in GH, already fixed

> * represent that there are Ubuntu changes via `ubuntu1` which also serves as a place increment for further uploads to the development release

Author: If that is upper case, then the above needs to be as well - done both

> Example: _Uploading `3.1` to Ubuntu -Devel while Debian is not yet at `3.1` so we pick `3.1` followed by `-0` representing it is not based on Debian and `ubuntu1` to index and iterate changes to Ubuntu to an overall `3.1-0ubuntu1`._

|        | Old          | New          |
| ------ | ------------ | ------------ |
| Debian | 2.1-1        | _unchanged_  |
| Devel  | 2.1-1ubuntu2 | 3.1-0ubuntu1 |

## Version: Adding a change in Ubuntu as a stable release update

> After a version of Ubuntu is released, changes to packages follow a slightly different versining scheme which ensures upgradability to later releases and allows to recognize the history of changes from just looking at the version.

Author: fixed

The overall scheme stays the same for [Stable release updates](https://wiki.ubuntu.com/StableReleaseUpdates). One still only changes the _ubuntu revision_ section of `[upstream_version]-[debian_revision]ubuntu[ubuntu_revision]`.

* Increment Y in the numeric `ubuntuX.Y` suffix, like: `ubuntu3.1 -> ubuntu3.2`.
* If this is the first change via the SRU process, add the `.1` suffix, like: `ubuntu3 -> ubuntu3.1`.

> * If no `ubuntuX` was present before, then set `ubuntu0.1` which will represent that there was no Ubuntu delta before `0` this upload which is the first to add `.1` a change.

Author: Hmm, this took me a while to accept - but ok. suggestion taken

* If two releases have the same version, then this would make the package non upgradeable and cause a version conflict (two builds, but not the same). To resolve this, add the numeric `YY.MM` release version in between `ubuntuX` and the increment `.1`. For Jammy that might look like `...ubuntu3.22.04.1`

> Compare these examples with the _Adding a change in the current Ubuntu development release_ section above.

Reviewer 2: Can we add a link to the section heading?

Author: We can, but we should do this everywhere when I refer to any other sections.

.... 5 of them ... Done

> Example: _Adding a change to `3.3.0-1` in the Ubuntu development release will use `3.3.0-1ubuntu0.1`_

> Example: _Adding another change to `3.3.0-1ubuntu1` in the Ubuntu development release will use `3.3.0-1ubuntu1.1`_

> | Previous version             | Recommended version                           |

Reviewer 2: As was suggested above, this table needs to be introduced as it's not clear what the purpose of it it

Author: I have generally reworked the former "Example" with text to "Example in detail:"
I also made the wordy examples match the early tables entries (to build a connection between text and table).
Finally the tables got a header saying "List of these and further related Examples:"

In doing so I added even more example lines to tables, fixed formatting and found a few other minor things.
Thanks @panlinux and @s-makin for bringing this up.

| ---------------------------- | --------------------------------------------- |
| 2.0-2                        | 2.0-2ubuntu0.1                                |
| 2.0-2ubuntu2                 | 2.0-2ubuntu2.1                                |
| 2.0-2ubuntu2.1               | 2.0-2ubuntu2.2                                |
| 2.0-2build1                  | 2.0-2ubuntu0.1                                |
| 2.0                          | 2.0ubuntu0.1                                  |
| 2.0-2ubuntu0.22.04.1         | 2.0-2ubuntu0.22.04.2                          |
| 2.0-2 in two releases        | 2.0-2ubuntu0.11.10.1 and 2.0-2ubuntu0.22.04.1 |
| 2.0-2ubuntu1 in two releases | 2.0-2ubuntu1.11.10.1 and 2.0-2ubuntu1.22.04.1 |

## Version: native packages

There exist packages in which Debian or Ubuntu are themselves the upstream.

> This is due to the classification as _native_ or _non-native_ package as outlined by the referred [Debian control field version](https://www.debian.org/doc/debian-policy/ch-controlfields.html#version) and in more detail [Debian source packages](https://www.debian.org/doc/debian-policy/ch-source.html#s-source-packages).

Reviewer 2: Is the "native" wording something that exists in Debian (that we can't change)? If this is wording we have control over, it would be ideal to change this away from the "native/non-native" for inclusivity.

Author: It is a defined term in the Debian policy.
The second link already is the reference that shows this.

To quote "Presence of the `debian_revision` part indicates this package is a non-native package. Absence indicates the package is a native package."

Due to that in a Debian native package, there is no `-debian_revision`.

This continues into native Ubuntu packages, which have neither `-debian_revision` nor `ubuntu[ubuntu_revision]`.

> Example: _A package native to Debian (no `-`), getting an Ubuntu change in the devel release `39.3 -> 39.3ubuntu1`_

> Example: _A package native to Ubuntu (no `-`) and no `ubuntuX` getting an Ubuntu change in the devel release `39.3 -> 39.4`_

> Yes that means, from just the version, you can not differentiate between a _native Debian package that was synced_ and a _native package in Ubuntu_

Reviewer: Missind EOL "."

Author: Was lost in the italics, thanks!

> Yes that means, from just the version, you can not differentiate between a _native Debian package that was synced_ and a _native package in Ubuntu_

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Yes that means, from just the version, you can not differentiate between a _native Debian package that was synced_ and a _native package in Ubuntu_.
```

Author: already spotted and fixed

| Previous version       | Devel upload  |  SRU upload   |
| ---------------------- | ------------- | ------------- |
| 2.0 (native in Debian) | 2.0ubuntu1    |  2.0ubuntu0.1 |
| 2.0 (native in Ubuntu) | 2.1           |  2.0ubuntu0.1 |
| 2.0ubuntu2             | 2.0ubuntu3    |  2.0ubuntu2.1 |

> | 2.0build1              | 2.0ubuntu1    |  2.0ubuntu1   |

Author: you are just right and nothing else - fixed!

Note: The rule of multiple releases having the same version requiring to add also a per-release YY.MM to differentiate and ensure upgradability might apply here as well.

## Version: no change rebuilds

Ubuntu continuously [syncs](https://github.com/canonical/ubuntu-maintainers-handbook/blob/main/Syncs.md#why-a-sync-is-better) changes from Debian

> until the [Debian import freeze](https://wiki.ubuntu.com/DebianImportFreeze) date is met, then this is deactivated to stabilize the upcoming Ubuntu release.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
until the [Debian import freeze](https://wiki.ubuntu.com/DebianImportFreeze) date is met, then syncs are deactivated to stabilize the upcoming Ubuntu release.
```

Reviewer 2: At least, I'm assuming that "this" in this context refers to the syncs

Author: correct

> As outlined there _" will be automatically imported from Debian where they have not been customized for Ubuntu, that is when the version number of the

Reviewer 2: Outlined where? This is a bit confusing because you have two links in the previous sentence so it's not clear which one you're referring to

Author: In the links above - clarified and improved the following sentence

package in the current Ubuntu development branch does not contain the substring _ubuntu"_.
And as we learned above adding a change in Ubuntu will add a `ubuntuX` suffix, which prevents that sync.

> So what if one needs to rebuild a package, for example due to a libarary transition to build against new versions of other packages,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
So what if one needs to rebuild a package, for example due to a library transition to build against new versions of other packages,
```

Author: thanks

but does not want to prevent future automatic syncing from Debian?
Well, just rebuilding is not considered a change that has to be retained, so in this special case one would:

* Not add `ubuntuX` and instead add a `buildX` suffix.
* If there is already one such `buildX` suffix present, increment it.

> * If there is already a `ubuntuX` suffix there would be no auto-sync anyway, so increment the existing suffix

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* If there is already an `ubuntuX` suffix there would be no auto-sync anyway, so increment the existing suffix.
```

Author: ack

> Example: _A Debian package 3.1-3 needs a rebuild in Ubuntu `3.1-3 -> 3.1-3build1`_

| Previous version             | No change rebuild in devel    |
| ---------------------------- | ----------------------------- |
| 2.0-2                        | 2.0-2build1                   |
| 2.0-2ubuntu2                 | 2.0-2ubuntu3                  |
| 2.0-2build1                  | 2.0-2build2                   |
| 2.0 (native in Debian)       | 2.0build1                     |

> | 2.0 (native in Ubuntu)       | 2.1                           |

Author: AFAIK yes,
this is even trickier than you think (2.1 or 3 actually) and I guess the only way is to add more examples.
That is true here and in the "native package" section which I extended both with text and examples.

I hope it is correct now, glad we found something that is even "hard to answer" for us.

> | 2.0 (native in Ubuntu)       | 2.1                           |

Author: There is no point in adding that as it would never be synced from anywhere.
We'd also never add `ubuntuX` either.

I think both work, lets decide this by a social battle (majority wins) and then land this (I'm happy to correct if what is right is formally defined anywhere).

```
$ for p in $(dpkg -l | awk '/^ii/ {pkg=$2; ver=$3; printf("%70s %45s\n", ver, pkg);}' | awk '$1 !~ /-/' | awk '$1 !~ /ubuntu/'  | sort -u -k 1,1 | awk '{print $2}'); do if ! rmadison -u debian $p -a source -s unstable | grep -q source; then echo "$p is native and only in ubuntu"; apt changelog $p > $p.changelog; else echo "$p is native in Debian"; fi; done
...
$ grep -i -B4 'no.*change.*rebuild' *.changelog | grep urgency | grep build -c
11
$ grep -i -B4 'no.*change.*rebuild' *.changelog | grep urgency | grep -v build -c
4
```

This was just my laptop, I didn't bother checking the full archive.

So both exist and work and arrr

You know what, I'll write it as "weakly defined, both are allowed"

It is unlikely, but possible that one needs a no change rebuild as part of a [Stable release update](https://wiki.ubuntu.com/StableReleaseUpdates),

> but in this situation auto-syncing isn't active anyway and the need for upgradability apply.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
but in this situation auto-syncing isn't active anyway and the need for upgradability applies.
```

Author: ack

So a no-change-rebuild in regard to picking a version number in this case is identical to any other change

> (see the section _Adding a change in Ubuntu as a stable release update_ above)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
(see the section _Adding a change in Ubuntu as a stable release update_ above).
```

Author: ack

## Version: Backport from upstream

> There are more special cases, especially related to backports (As in backports of new versions via SRU, not as in https://wiki.ubuntu.com/UbuntuBackports).

Reviewer: lowercase "(As in backports..." -> "(as in backports...".

Author: fixed

> There are more special cases, especially related to backports (As in backports of new versions via SRU, not as in https://wiki.ubuntu.com/UbuntuBackports).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are more special cases, especially related to backports (as in backports of new versions via SRU, not as in https://wiki.ubuntu.com/UbuntuBackports).
```

Author: already spotted and fixed

In the rare case of a _new upstream release being pushed to all stable releases_

> it will lose all its former version suffix. This is a common practice on some

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
it will lose all its former version suffixes. This is a common practice on some
```

Author: ack

minor release exception processes, where we pick up the most recent upstream
content, but avoid regressions/changes due to packaging changes like moving files,
splitting or removing binary packages etc. To represent this the upload should:

> * Signal that it is not based on a Debian packaging version by using `-0` as the Debian packaging revision
> * Signal that it was not yet packaged before in this Ubuntu release before via `ubuntu0.`
> * Add a suffix per Ubuntu release like `.22.04`
> * Add an increment that can be used in subsequent individual per release SRU uploads like `.1`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Signal that it is not based on a Debian packaging version by using `-0` as the Debian packaging revision.
* Signal that it was not yet packaged before in this Ubuntu release before via `ubuntu0.`.
* Add a suffix per Ubuntu release like `.22.04`.
* Add an increment that can be used in subsequent individual per-release SRU uploads like `.1`.
```

Author: ack

> > Example: _Uploading `3.1` but packaging wise using what is already in LTS and LTS+1, not with all the Ubuntu changes that might be in `3.1-1ubuntu2`_

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> Example: _Uploading `3.1` but packaging-wise using what is already in LTS and LTS+1 -- not with all the Ubuntu changes that might be in `3.1-1ubuntu2`_.
```

Author: ack

|       | Old          | New                  |
| ----- | ------------ | -------------------- |
| LTS   | 2.0-2        | 3.1-0ubuntu0.22.04.1 |
| LTS+1 | 2.7-2ubuntu1 | 3.1-0ubuntu0.22.10.1 |

> The new version is independent to the former version of the target release, here an example for 22.04:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The new version is independent of the former version of the target release, here an example for 22.04:
```

Author: ack

| Previous       | New upstream | Upload for LTS       |
| -------------- | ------------ | -------------------- |
| 2.0-2          | 3.1          | 3.1-0ubuntu0.22.04.1 |
| 2.0-2ubuntu2   | 3.1          | 3.1-0ubuntu0.22.04.1 |
| 2.0-2ubuntu2.1 | 3.1          | 3.1-0ubuntu0.22.04.1 |
| 2.0-2build1    | 3.1          | 3.1-0ubuntu0.22.04.1 |

## Version: Backport from Ubuntu devel

> But if instead the backport is actually without _meaningful sourceful

Reviewer 2: What does sourceful mean in this context?

differences_ to what is in the current Ubuntu development release (a common
practice for some packages that keep the same version everywhere) with only
minimal backporting adaptations it would instead:

> * Signal that is it basically _identical but backported_ by starting with the same version as the one in the development release
> * Add a `~` to ensure it sorts earlier than the version in -devel
> * Add a suffix per Ubuntu release like `22.04`
> * Add an increment that can be used in subsequent individual per release SRU uploads like `.1`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Signal that is it basically _identical but backported_ by starting with the same version as the one in the development release.
* Add a `~` to ensure it sorts earlier than the version in -devel.
* Add a suffix per Ubuntu release like `22.04`.
* Add an increment that can be used in subsequent individual per-release SRU uploads like `.1`.
```

Author: ack

> > Example: _Uploading `3.1` to LTS and LTS+1 being more or less identical to what is in -devel in `3.1-1ubuntu2`_

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> Example: _Uploading `3.1` to LTS and LTS+1 being more or less identical to what is in -devel in `3.1-1ubuntu2`_.
```

Author: ack

|       | Old          | New                  |
| ----- | ------------ | -------------------- |
| LTS   | 2.0-2        | 3.1-1ubuntu2~22.04.1 |
| LTS+1 | 2.7-2ubuntu1 | 3.1-1ubuntu2~22.10.1 |

> The new version is again independent to the former version that was present in the target release.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The new version is again independent of the former version that was present in the target release.
```

Author: ack

| Previous       | New Dev      | Upload for LTS       |
| -------------- | ------------ | -------------------- |
| 2.0-2          | 3.1-1ubuntu2 | 3.1-1ubuntu2~22.04.1 |
| 2.0-2ubuntu2   | 3.1-1ubuntu2 | 3.1-1ubuntu2~22.04.1 |
| 2.0-2ubuntu2.1 | 3.1-1ubuntu2 | 3.1-1ubuntu2~22.04.1 |
| 2.0-2build1    | 3.1-1ubuntu2 | 3.1-1ubuntu2~22.04.1 |

Note: If in this case the package in the Ubuntu development release is a native package one
would still use _the same version_ as in the development release.

> > Example: _Uploading `3.1` to LTS and LTS+1 being more or less identical to what is in -devel in `3.1`_

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> Example: _Uploading `3.1` to LTS and LTS+1 being more or less identical to what is in -devel in `3.1`_.
```

Author: ack

|       | Old          | New         |
| ----- | ------------ | ----------- |
| LTS   | 2.0-2        | 3.1~22.04.1 |
| LTS+1 | 2.7-2ubuntu1 | 3.1~22.10.1 |

## Version: Undoing mistakes

In a very rare case where an upgrade to a new upstream version of a package
caused major regression and the only way out is rolling back, the convention is
to insert `+really` followed by the actual version number.

To be clear, both should be used sparingly and only if really needed.
Please also have a look at [+really in control fields](https://www.debian.org/doc/debian-policy/ch-controlfields.html#epochs-should-be-used-sparingly).

> > Example: _Uploading `3.1` caused a regression, so rolling back to the previous version_

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> Example: _Uploading `3.1` caused a regression, so rolling back to the previous version_.
```

Author: ack

> Version string Format

Author: ack

=====================

Selecting the right version can be quite complex as there are many conditions
that need to be considered.

> The following paragraphs first links to the required basics, which are shared with Debian.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following paragraphs first link to the required basics, which are shared with Debian.
```

The `-` splits the upstream version from the Debian packaging segment as you have seen in [Debian control field "Version"](https://www.debian.org/doc/debian-policy/ch-controlfields.html#version).
The `ubuntu` string then marks that whatever follows it is related to changes added in Ubuntu.

This distinction allows each party involved in providing a package to the users — Upstream, Debian and Ubuntu — to modify and iterate on their section of the version number without interfering with others.
When everyone abides by these conventions we can guarantee package upgradability, but also allow that one can derive a lot of the history by just looking at the package version.

## Version: Adding a change in the current Ubuntu development release

As shown above `[upstream_version]-[debian_revision]ubuntu[ubuntu_revision]` is the basic pattern.
Changes in the development release will always add or increment the number that directly follows the `ubuntu` string.
Therefore, if this is the first Ubuntu change, one would append `ubuntu1` as an Ubuntu suffix.
If there was already an Ubuntu change, one would increment the suffix like `ubuntu1 -> ubuntu2`.

> Finally if formerly there has been one or many _no change rebuilds_ there might be a `buildX` suffix which is in this case replaced by `ubuntu1`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finally if there has already been one (or many) _no change rebuilds_ there might be a `buildX` suffix which is in this case replaced by `ubuntu1`.
```

| ---------------------------- | --------------------- |
| 2.0-2                        | 2.0-2ubuntu1          |
| 2.0-2ubuntu1                 | 2.0-2ubuntu2          |
| 2.0-2ubuntu2                 | 2.0-2ubuntu3          |
| 2.0-2build2                  | 2.0-2ubuntu1          |

Note: While being the common case, please consider reading further about more special cases which can lead to different results.

## Version: Merging from Debian

If Ubuntu has delta to the package from Debian, it can not be
[automatically synced](Syncs.md#why-a-sync-is-better) otherwise that delta would be lost.
In that case an Ubuntu developer regularly [merges the delta](PackageMerging.md#merging) (usually at least once per Ubuntu release)
that is in Ubuntu with the content from Debian and indirectly also with the changes by upstream.

The counter for Ubuntu increments resets to 1, therefore the version for the new upload to the Ubuntu development is the version from Debian with a suffix of `ubuntu1`

> Example in detail: _Uploading `3.1` to Ubuntu -Devel based on Debian `3.1-2` retaining former Ubuntu delta of `2.1-1ubuntu2` would become `3.1-2ubuntu1`_

> List of this and further related Examples:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
List of this and further related examples:
```

| Old-Debian   | Old-Ubuntu           | New-Debian     | Ubuntu Devel          |
| ------------ | -------------------- | -------------- | --------------------- |
| 2.1-1        | 2.1-1ubuntu2         | 3.1-2          | 3.1-2ubuntu1          |
| 1:7.0+dfsg-7 | 1:7.0+dfsg-7ubuntu14 | 1:8.0.4+dfsg-1 | 1:8.0.4+dfsg-1ubuntu1 |

## Version: Merging from Upstream

The mentioned special case of an _upstream merge_ is triggered when Ubuntu merges directly from upstream ahead of Debian
upstream. In this case the new version shall:

* Reflect that it was not yet packaged in Debian (at this point in time) and thereby is not _really_ based on a Debian version by using `-0` as the Debian version suffix.

> * Represent that there are Ubuntu changes via `ubuntu1` which also serves as a place increment for further uploads to the development release

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Represent that there are Ubuntu changes via `ubuntu1` which also serves as a place increment for further uploads to the development release.
```

> Example in detail: _Uploading `3.1` to Ubuntu -Devel while Debian is not yet at `3.1` so we pick `3.1` followed by `-0` representing it is not based on Debian and `ubuntu1` to index and iterate changes to Ubuntu to an overall `3.1-0ubuntu1`._

> List of this and further related Examples:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
List of this and further related examples:
```

* Increment Y in the numeric `ubuntuX.Y` suffix, like: `ubuntu3.1 -> ubuntu3.2`.
* If this is the first change via the SRU process, add the `.1` suffix, like: `ubuntu3 -> ubuntu3.1`.
* If no `ubuntuX` was present before, then set `ubuntu0.1` which will represent that there was no Ubuntu delta (`0`) before this upload which is the first to add a change (`.1`).
* If two releases have the same version, then this would make the package non upgradeable and cause a version conflict (two builds, but not the same). To resolve this, add the numeric `YY.MM` release version in between `ubuntuX` and the increment `.1`. For Jammy that might look like `...ubuntu3.22.04.1`

Compare these examples with the _[Adding a change in the current Ubuntu development release](VersionStrings.md#version-adding-a-change-in-the-current-ubuntu-development-release)_ section above to better see the subtle difference.

> Example in detail: _Adding a change to `2.0-2` in a stable Ubuntu release will use `2.0-2ubuntu0.1`_

> Example in detail: _Adding another change to `2.0-2ubuntu0.1` in a stable Ubuntu release will use `2.0-2ubuntu0.2`_

> List of these and further related Examples:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
List of these and further related examples:
```

| 2.0-2ubuntu0.22.04.1         | 2.0-2ubuntu0.22.04.2                          |
| 2.0-2 in two releases        | 2.0-2ubuntu0.11.10.1 and 2.0-2ubuntu0.22.04.1 |
| 2.0-2ubuntu1 in two releases | 2.0-2ubuntu1.11.10.1 and 2.0-2ubuntu1.22.04.1 |

## Version: native packages

There exist packages in which Debian or Ubuntu are themselves the upstream.
This is due to the classification as _native_ or _non-native_ package as outlined by the referred [Debian control field version](https://www.debian.org/doc/debian-policy/ch-controlfields.html#version) and in more detail [Debian source packages](https://www.debian.org/doc/debian-policy/ch-source.html#s-source-packages).
To quote "Presence of the `debian_revision` part indicates this package is a non-native package. Absence indicates the package is a native package."

Due to that in a Debian native package, there is no `-debian_revision`.

This continues into native Ubuntu packages, which have neither `-debian_revision` nor `ubuntu[ubuntu_revision]`.

> Example in detail: _A package native to Debian `2.0` (no `-`), getting an Ubuntu change in the devel release would use `2.0ubuntu1`

> Furthermore native packages versioning is package dependent, if it uses only _major_ or a _major.minor_ or any other version pattern is the maintainers choice.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Furthermore, native package versioning is package dependent; whether it uses only _major_, or _major.minor_, or any other version pattern is the maintainer's choice.
```

Just as usually upstream can and will version software the way they consider the best.

> Due to that selecting the right subsequent version requires to check the package history or confer with its maintainer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Due to that, selecting the right subsequent version requires you to check the package history or confer with its maintainer.
```

> Example in detail: _A package native to Ubuntu `2.0` (no `-` and no `ubuntuX`) getting an Ubuntu change in the devel release would use `2.1` or `3.0`_

Yes that means, from just the version, you can not differentiate between a _native Debian package that was synced_ and a _native package in Ubuntu._

> List of these and further related Examples:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
List of these and further related examples:
```

| ---------------------- | ------------- | ------------- |
| 2.0 (native in Debian) | 2.0ubuntu1    |  2.0ubuntu0.1 |
| 2.0 (native in Ubuntu) | 2.1 or 3.0    |  2.0ubuntu0.1 |
| 2   (native in Debian) | 2ubuntu1      |  2ubuntu0.1   |
| 2   (native in Ubuntu) | 3             |  2ubuntu0.1   |
| 2.0ubuntu2             | 2.0ubuntu3    |  2.0ubuntu2.1 |
| 2.0build1              | 2.0ubuntu1    |  2.0ubuntu0.1 |
| 2.0build2              | 2.0ubuntu1    |  2.0ubuntu0.1 |

Note: The rule of multiple releases having the same version requiring to add also a per-release YY.MM to differentiate and ensure upgradability might apply here as well.

## Version: no change rebuilds

Ubuntu continuously [syncs](Syncs.md#why-a-sync-is-better) changes from Debian
until the [Debian import freeze](https://wiki.ubuntu.com/DebianImportFreeze) date is met, then syncs are deactivated to stabilize the upcoming Ubuntu release.
As outlined in these references there _"will be automatically imported from Debian where they have not been customized for Ubuntu, that is when the version number of the
package in the current Ubuntu development branch does not contain the substring ubuntu"_.

> And as we learned in _[Adding a change in the current Ubuntu development release](VersionStrings.md#version-adding-a-change-in-the-current-ubuntu-development-release)_

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
And as we learned in _[adding a change in the current Ubuntu development release](VersionStrings.md#version-adding-a-change-in-the-current-ubuntu-development-release)_
```

> above adding a change in Ubuntu will add a `ubuntuX` suffix, which thereby prevents that automatic sync process from clobbering these changes.

Reviewer 2: "clobbering" gave me a bit of a pause there because it's quite a UK-specific slang - I'm not sure what you mean by it, but it might be not what I think it means so I just want to clarify that I've understood it correctly. When we say something gets clobbered, it usually means beaten with a blunt object. My inference then is that the automatic sync process has the capacity to "mess up" the changes. If I've understood this correctly, I'd suggest changing clobbering to something like "interfering with" to avoid the slang.

Author: No it is not "interfering" which demonstrates it is maybe the wrong word.
"Clobbering changes" is usually referred to describing that changes that were done are entirely lost due to that action.

More like:
State1 => changes => State2 => clobbering changes => State1

And certainly not beaten with a blunt object :-)

I have tried to make it better and now have:

... will add a `ubuntuX` suffix, which prevents the automatic synchronisation process, which thereby will ensure Ubuntu is not unintentionally losing these changes.

So what if one needs to rebuild a package, for example due to a library transition to build against new versions of other packages,
but does not want to prevent future automatic syncing from Debian?
Well, just rebuilding is not considered a change that has to be retained, so in this special case one would:

* Not add `ubuntuX` and instead add a `buildX` suffix.
* If there is already one such `buildX` suffix present, increment it.

> * If there is already an `ubuntuX` suffix there would be no auto-sync anyway, so increment the existing suffix

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* If there is already an `ubuntuX` suffix there would be no auto-sync anyway, so increment the existing suffix.
```

As explained above for _[native packages](VersionStrings.md#version-native-packages)_ one has to check which digit to increment.

> Example in detail: _A Debian package `2.0-2` needs a rebuild in Ubuntu which would use `2.0-2build1`_

> List of this and further related Examples:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
List of this and further related examples:
```

| Previous version             | No change rebuild in devel    |
| ---------------------------- | ----------------------------- |
| 2.0-2                        | 2.0-2build1                   |
| 2.0-2ubuntu2                 | 2.0-2ubuntu3                  |
| 2.0-2build1                  | 2.0-2build2                   |
| 2.0 (native in Ubuntu)       | 2.1 or 3                      |
| 2   (native in Ubuntu)       | 3                             |
| 2.0 (native in Debian)       | 2.0build1                     |
| 2   (native in Debian)       | 2build1                       |

It is unlikely, but possible that one needs a no change rebuild as part of a [Stable release update](https://wiki.ubuntu.com/StableReleaseUpdates),
but in this situation auto-syncing isn't active anyway and the need for upgradability applies.
So a no-change-rebuild in regard to picking a version number in this case is identical to any other change

> (see the section _(Adding a change in Ubuntu as a stable release update)[VersionStrings.md#version-adding-a-change-in-ubuntu-as-a-stable-release-update]_ above).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
(see the section _(adding a change in Ubuntu as a stable release update)[VersionStrings.md#version-adding-a-change-in-ubuntu-as-a-stable-release-update]_ above).
```

## Version: Backport from upstream

There are more special cases, especially related to backports (as in backports of new versions via SRU, not as in https://wiki.ubuntu.com/UbuntuBackports).

In the rare case of a _new upstream release being pushed to all stable releases_
it will lose all its former version suffixes. This is a common practice on some
minor release exception processes, where we pick up the most recent upstream
content, but avoid regressions/changes due to packaging changes like moving files,
splitting or removing binary packages etc. To represent this the upload should:

* Signal that it is not based on a Debian packaging version by using `-0` as the Debian packaging revision.

> * Signal that it was not yet packaged before in this Ubuntu release before via `ubuntu0.`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Signal that it was not yet packaged before in this Ubuntu release before via `ubuntu0.`.
```

* Add a suffix per Ubuntu release like `.22.04`.
* Add an increment that can be used in subsequent individual per release SRU uploads like `.1`.

> Example in detail: _Uploading `3.1` but packaging-wise using what is already in LTS and LTS+1 -- not with all the Ubuntu changes that might be in `3.1-1ubuntu2`_.

> List of this and further related Examples:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
List of this and further related examples:
```

|       | Old          | New                  |
| ----- | ------------ | -------------------- |
| LTS   | 2.0-2        | 3.1-0ubuntu0.22.04.1 |
| LTS+1 | 2.7-2ubuntu1 | 3.1-0ubuntu0.22.10.1 |
| LTS+2 | 2.7-2ubuntu1 | 3.1-0ubuntu0.23.04.1 |

> The new version is independent of the former version of the target release, here an list of examples targetting 22.04:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The new version is independent of the former version of the target release. Here is a list of examples targeting 22.04:
```

| Previous       | New upstream | Upload for LTS       |
| -------------- | ------------ | -------------------- |
| 2.0-2          | 3.1          | 3.1-0ubuntu0.22.04.1 |
| 2.0-2ubuntu2   | 3.1          | 3.1-0ubuntu0.22.04.1 |
| 2.0-2ubuntu2.1 | 3.1          | 3.1-0ubuntu0.22.04.1 |
| 2.0-2build1    | 3.1          | 3.1-0ubuntu0.22.04.1 |

## Version: Backport from Ubuntu devel

But if instead the backport is actually without _meaningful differences_ to what is in the current Ubuntu development release (a common
practice for some packages that keep the same version everywhere) with only minimal backporting adaptations it would instead:

* Signal that is it basically _identical but backported_ by starting with the same version as the one in the development release.
* Add a `~` to ensure it sorts earlier than the version in -devel.
* Add a suffix per Ubuntu release like `22.04`.
* Add an increment that can be used in subsequent individual per release SRU uploads like `.1`.

> Example in detail: _Uploading `3.1` to LTS and LTS+1 being more or less identical to what is in -devel in `3.1-1ubuntu2`_.

> List of this and further related Examples:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
List of this and further related examples:
```

|       | Old          | New                  |
| ----- | ------------ | -------------------- |
| LTS   | 2.0-2        | 3.1-1ubuntu2~22.04.1 |
| LTS+1 | 2.7-2ubuntu1 | 3.1-1ubuntu2~22.10.1 |
| LTS+2 | 2.7-2ubuntu1 | 3.1-1ubuntu2~23.04.1 |

> The new version is again independent of the former version that was present in the target release, here examples targetting 22.04.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The new version is again independent of the former version that was present in the target release, here examples targeting 22.04:
```

| Previous       | New Dev      | Upload for LTS       |
| -------------- | ------------ | -------------------- |
| 2.0-2          | 3.1-1ubuntu2 | 3.1-1ubuntu2~22.04.1 |
| 2.0-2ubuntu2   | 3.1-1ubuntu2 | 3.1-1ubuntu2~22.04.1 |
| 2.0-2ubuntu2.1 | 3.1-1ubuntu2 | 3.1-1ubuntu2~22.04.1 |
| 2.0-2build1    | 3.1-1ubuntu2 | 3.1-1ubuntu2~22.04.1 |

Note: If in this case the package in the Ubuntu development release is a native package one
would still use _the same version_ as in the development release.

> Example in detail: _Uploading `3.1` to LTS and LTS+1 being more or less identical to what is in -devel in `3.1`_.

> List of this and further related Examples:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
List of this and further related examples:
```

|       | Old          | New         |
| ----- | ------------ | ----------- |
| LTS   | 2.0-2        | 3.1~22.04.1 |
| LTS+1 | 2.7-2ubuntu1 | 3.1~22.10.1 |
| LTS+2 | 2.7-2ubuntu1 | 3.1~23.04.1 |

## Version: Undoing mistakes

In a very rare case where an upgrade to a new upstream version of a package
caused major regression and the only way out is rolling back, the convention is
to insert `+really` followed by the actual version number.

To be clear, both should be used sparingly and only if really needed.
Please also have a look at [+really in control fields](https://www.debian.org/doc/debian-policy/ch-controlfields.html#epochs-should-be-used-sparingly).

> Example in detail: _Uploading `3.1` caused a regression, so rolling back to the previous version `2.0-2ubuntu2` would use `3.1+really2.0-2ubuntu2`_

> List of this and further related Examples:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
List of this and further related examples:
```
